.nh
.TH DIRENV-FETCHURL 1 "2019" direnv "User Manuals"
.SH NAME
.PP
direnv fetchurl - Fetch a URL to disk

.SH SYNOPSIS
.PP
\fIdirenv fetchurl\fP  []

.SH DESCRIPTION
.PP
This command downloads the given URL into a fixed disk location, based on the
content of the retrieved file.

.PP
This has been introduced to avoid a dependency on \fBcurl\fR or \fBwget\fR, while also
promoting a more secure way to fetch data from the Internet. Use this instead
of \fBcurl <url> | sh\fR\&.

.PP
This command has two modes of operation:

.RS
.IP "  1." 5
Just pass the URL to discover the integrity hash.
.IP "  2." 5
Pass the URL \fIand\fP the integrity hash to get back the on-disk location.

.RE

.PP
Since the on-disk location is based on the hash, it also acts as a cache. One
implication of this design is that URLs must be stable and always return the
same content.

.PP
Downloaded files are marked as read-only and executable so it can also be used
to fetch and execute static binaries.

.SH OPTIONS
.PP

    A HTTP URL that returns content on HTTP GET requests. 301 and other
    redirects are followed.

.PP

    When passed, the integrity of the retrieved content will be validated
    against the given hash. The hash encoding is based on the SRI W3C
    specification (see https://www.w3.org/TR/SRI/ ).

.SH OUTPUT
.PP
\fIdirenv fetchurl\fP outputs different content based on the argument.

.PP
If the \fBintegrity-hash\fR is being passed, it will output the path to the
on-disk location, if the retrieval was successful.

.PP
If only the \fBurl\fR is being passed, it will output the hash as well as some
human-readable instruction. If stdout is not a tty, only the hash will be
displayed.

.SH EXAMPLE
.EX
$ ./direnv fetchurl https://releases.nixos.org/nix/nix-2.3.7/install
Found hash: sha256-7Gxl5GzI9juc/U30Igh/pY+p6+gj5Waohfwql3jHIds=

Invoke fetchurl again with the hash as an argument to get the disk location:

  direnv fetchurl "https://releases.nixos.org/nix/nix-2.3.7/install" "sha256-7Gxl5GzI9juc/U30Igh/pY+p6+gj5Waohfwql3jHIds="
  #=> /home/zimbatm/.cache/direnv/cas/sha256-7Gxl5GzI9juc_U30Igh_pY+p6+gj5Waohfwql3jHIds=

.EE

.SH ENVIRONMENT VARIABLES
.PP
\fBXDG_CACHE_HOME\fP
    This variable is used to select the on-disk location of the fetched URLs
    as \fB$XDG_CACHE_HOME/direnv/cas\fR\&. If \fBXDG_CACHE_HOME\fP is unset or empty,
    defaults to \fB$HOME/.cache\fR\&.

.SH COPYRIGHT
.PP
MIT licence - Copyright (C) 2019 @zimbatm and contributors

.SH SEE ALSO
.PP
direnv-stdlib(1)
